So let's get the battery level and for that as I mentioned, I'll start with Android.
So let's go to the Android folder which is the Android app
our Dart and Flutter app will get merged in the end and there in the app folder, in the source folder,
in the main folder if you drill down into the Java com folder,
if you drill down all the way to the bottom, you'll find this main activity file and this is now a Java
file and that's important,
this means here we write Java code, not Dart.
Now of course you might not know Java
and I'm also not a Java expert. Now for this module here,
you can simply follow along what I type
and as I said, if you ever are in a situation where you need a certain Java functionality in your app
and you find no fitting plugin, maybe you find a snippet in some blog post or on Stack Overflow
which you can more or less just copy into your Java code to get the functionality you want and then
connect it to Flutter.
So even if you're not a Java expert, this knowledge here is still useful because you can get some code
to work with your Flutter app which you otherwise won't be able to.
So here in the MainActivity.java file. we got a class and that's something we know from Dart, we're
extending something and in the end, this here, this onCreate method,
this is what runs when our Android application starts
you could say. Now in here below this generated plugin registrant thing here, you can now set up a new,
with the new keyword, MethodChannel.
Now important, for this to work, you first of all need to add an import. So let's go up to the imports
here and import io.Flutter.plugin, not plugins but plugin, .common.MethodChannel. Add
this import here and with that import added, you unlock this class here.
Now imports work a bit different in Java than they do in Dart,
you specifically have to import everything you want to use, every class you want to use on its own and
that's what we're doing here. We're importing the MethodChannel class and where in Dart
you created a class just like this, in Java you would need to add the new keyword in front of that.
So this now creates a new MethodChannel in Java and you might remember that we also created one in
Flutter,
so we're establishing that connection, in Flutter we're creating it to send messages, here we're creating
it to receive messages and in there we have to call getFlutterView.
This is a function that should be available here
just like that.
The second argument we pass here is our channel identifier and that of course has to be the same identifier
as you set up here.
So grab this identifier you set up in your Flutter code,
this unique identifier and add it here as a string as well, as a second argument to the MethodChannel because
this establishes communication on the channel with this identifier. Now on MethodChannel here, you can call
set method call handler.
Now this is a method we can call and this method here, and I'll add this here in a new line to make it easier
to read, gets another new object, a new object of type method call handler.
So create a new method call handler with the method call handler class
and for this to be available, you need to add another import based on your Flutter plugin common method
channel import
and there we add the method call handler subimport
so to say. So we're importing the MethodChannel here and then from that package, also specifically
in addition the method call handler.
So then we create a new method called handler here and this actually now is a special syntax in Java
here where we can now add curly braces after this to dynamically override with @Override, with that
@Override annotation, a method in there and that's a public void method, public is a special keyword
in Java that makes it clear that this method can be called from outside.
You might remember that in Dart, you could use an underscore to let everyone know that you don't want
it to be called from outside,
the equivalent would be private here and public is the default in Dart which is why there aren't public
or private keywords.
So here, we'll override the public method which doesn't return anything
and that method will be called onMethodCall, written like this.
So this is the end a method which will be triggered when an incoming method call is received
and this on the fly overriding is simply a feature Java offers here. So here, onMethodCall takes
two arguments,
the first is of type method call and we can name it call, the second is of type result and we can name
it result.
Now we need to import these two classes, the first one is imported from io.flutter.plugin.common.MethodCall
and then we can also import another one from the MethodChannel import and there,
the result import.
So you have to import this general method call import and this result import here and with these imports
added up there, this here should work
but of course right now, it's not doing anything, we just set up the basics.
Now we can actually work on the concrete implementation of the code that should fetch us the battery
level and for that,
we'll first of all have to add more imports to this file and that's import android.content.ContextWrapper and
then we have another import from android.content.Intent,
so these are now all not Flutter specific imports but from the Android packages themselves.
So we have another import, that's android.content.IntentFilter and we will use all these things
we're importing in the code we're about to write
and then I'll explain what they do. We also import android.iOS.BatteryManager,
you can probably guess what that will help us do. We import android.iOS.Build.VERSION in
capital characters, then import android.iOS.Build.VERSION_CODES,
also capital characters and import android.iOS.Bundle like this and of course you find
all this code attached to the last lecture of this module in case you're getting stuck.
So with these imports added, let's add a new method outside of this onCreate method but inside
of the main activity class, maybe here and this will be a private method which means it can only be called
from inside the class which will return an integer, so Java knows integers as well and I'll name it
getBatteryLevel but that name is up to you, it doesn't have to be the name you used here in Flutter. So
this name here doesn't have to be the same name as you use here, often it makes sense but it doesn't have
to be the same name.
So with that function defined, let's create a new battery level variable and set it to -1 initially
which is basically an invalid battery level as a default. Then I want to check the version thing we're
importing here which lets you find out which version of Android we're running on and there, tap into
SDK_INT and if that is greater or equal to VERSION_CODES.LOLLIPOP, then I will execute
some code, otherwise I'll execute some other code. This check is required because getting the battery
level simply differs depending on which Android version you're running on and with that, we're checking if
we're on a more recent version of Android, if that's the case, we can use a certain code for getting the
battery level and otherwise, we'll have to use a workaround code. So let's start with the more recent
code, there we create a new battery manager variable which is of type battery manager and you should
always specify the type
here in Java and then here, we can call get system service which is a function that should be globally
available and we want to get access to the battery service here, like this,
should also be available. Now
this can be converted to a battery manager object by adding brackets battery manager in front of it and
with it, we have access to the battery manager in the end.
Now the battery level can be set equal to
batteryManager.getIntProperty batteryManager.BATTERY_PROPERTY_CAPACITY.
So this code here in the end will give us the current battery level of our device with this battery
property constant here which we're accessing through the battery manager
and with that, we're setting the battery level,
that's what's happening here. Now in the else snippet here,
I'll write
that fallback code, there we create an intent of type intent and then create a new context wrapper around
our application context which we get with
get application context, a globally available
function and then on that, we can call register receiver null and then new intent filter and then the intent
should be action battery changed and this is in the end a way of getting notified when our battery level
changes
and we also get notified when we set this up initially to basically fetch our battery level.
Now we can therefore set the battery level variable equal to Intent.getIntExtra to retrieve some data
from that intent, so from that incoming information package,
so getIntExtra batteryManager.EXTRA_LEVEL, second argument here should be
-1 which is a fallback value in case we're not able to retrieve that, times 100 to get the value in readable
percentage values.
Let me also add brackets around that and then I'll divide that by Intent.getIntExtra
BatteryManager.EXTRA_SCALE and here, fallback is -1 as well. This will in the end give us a battery level in percentage
and with that, after the if/else block, we definitely have a battery level and if it's just -1 as a fallback
which we can return.
So now this is our logic for getting the battery level and of course there are a lot of Java and Android
specifics in there into which I won't dive here. Now in onMethodCall up there,
we want to listen to that getBatteryLevel call and then call this method and return the result.
So here, I'll check if my incoming call method equals
and now here, we need that string identifier
we're also using here in Flutter,
so getBatteryLevel
in my case, I'm checking whether that's the incoming call we're getting on this channel and if that's the
case, then I'll get my battery level here by calling getBatteryLevel and that's now this internal method
we just defined down there and if battery level now is not equal to -1, which means we have a valid
value, then I'll call result success, result is
this argument we're getting, success and forward battery level and that will basically pass it on to
the Flutter code,
else if we do have a battery level of -1 or of some other invalid value, then I will call
result error to throw an error in my Flutter code
and here we can pass in an identifier, like unavailable and then a message, could not fetch battery level
and that will be forwarded to our Dart and Flutter code as well.
Now if we have a different message and not getBatteryLevel, then I'll call result not implemented,
which will basically also throw an error in the Flutter code telling the Flutter code that we have no
logic for handling this incoming method. Now with that, we should have code that works.
Let's quit our running emulator here and do a full restart and then see whether that works as it should
and I'm actually getting an error because in Dart, I always use single quotes for my string, so there
it's fine,
in Java you actually need to replace all these single quotes with double quotes.
That's Java specific, single quotes won't work here for strings like that
and one other error I found is in result error here, we have to pass a third argument as well
but that can just be null here. And now with that, let me try running this on my emulator again and now
this is actually built and shipping to the device. In order to see something there, of course we have to
make sure we call getBatteryLevel there and therefore in initState,
I'll now reach out to getBatteryLevel like this. Let's save
that
and do a full refresh thereafter to let that restart and now hopefully there, we see our battery level
change
and we do, to 100. Now that proves that this call works because on the emulator here, we simply have 100
as a battery level and I also got no error here, so this seems to work and that is how we can write some
native Android code and connect to that from inside our Flutter app.
Let's now move on to iOS.